[MUSIC]
In the previous video we
decided to solve the clustering
problem by making a probabilistic
model of our data.
But how?
How can we model our
data probabilistically?
Well we don't know that
many distributions so far.
But we know Gaussians, right?
So in week one we learned how to
fit the parameters of the Gaussian
distribution into the data set.
And we can do it here,
it's a reasonable thing to do.
But it turns out that Gaussian is not
the very best model for this kind of data.
Recall that we decided that our
data consist of several clusters or
groups which may be far
away from each other.
And even with this simple example,
we can see that Gaussian has
to model all the data points as
one big circle or maybe ellipse.
And in this case, it just has to
assign hyper probability to the center of
the circle, it's the way Gaussians works.
And you can see here that the center
of the Gaussian kind of fall into
the region in between the clusters where
there are not that many data points.
And this is the problem with modeling
this kind of data with one Gaussian.
We have to model everything
with one big circle, and
we have some regions in between the
clusters where there are few data points.
But the Gaussian just has to assign
probability to these regions.
So, what else can we do?
Are there any better probabilistic
models we can use here?
Well, if one Gaussian doesn't work, let's
use several of them, like three for
example.
So in this case we are kind of assuming
that each data point came from one of
the three Gaussians, and each Gaussian
explains one cluster of the data points.
Or if you put it more formally, then
the density of each data point
equals to the weighted sum of
three Gaussian densities, and
the weights pi are some
non-negative number which sum
up to 1 to make an actual
probability distribution.
So the parameters theta
here are the weights pi.
And three groups of parameters
of the three Gaussians.
Their locations, the mu vectors,
and their shapes, or
their covariance matrices sigma.
Note that if we succeed in fitting
this kind of model into our data,
we will solve clustering problem.
Because for each data point,
we may now find from which Gaussian
this data point came from.
And this is exactly the alternative
to finding the cluster index.
So we may say that all
the points that came from one
Gaussian are the points of
one particular cluster.
This model is sometimes called
Gaussian Mixture Model, or GMM for short.
So great, we have found model
which we would like to use.
What are some positive and
negative features of this model,
compared to just plain one Gaussian?
Well obviously,
Gaussian is much less flexible.
So Gaussian Mixture Model allowed us
to fit our complicated dataset, and
it actually turns out that you may
fit just almost any probability
distribution with Gaussian Mixture Model
with arbitrarily high accuracy.
Well of course as always happens with this
kind of theorems, in the worst case you
may have to use exponentially many
Gaussians, so it's not a very practical
theorem, but anyway Gaussian Mixture Model
is very powerful and flexible model.
The downside is obviously
the number of parameters.
So, as you increase the number
of Gaussians you use for
your data, you increase the number of
parameters by the same factor right?
Okay great.
We decided to use this kind
of Gaussian mixture model.
But how can we fit it?
How can we find its parameters?
So it's pi, mu and
sigma vectors and matrices.
Well the simplest way to fit
a probability distribution is to use
maximum likelihood estimation right?
So we want to find the values of
parameters which maximise the likelihood,
which is the density of our
data set given the parameters.
And we want to maximise this thing
with respect to the parameters.
As usually in machine learning,
we will assume that the data set consists
of N data points, which
are independent given our parameters.
Which basically means that we
can factorize the likelihood.
So the likelihood equals to the product
of likelihoods of individual objects.
Well, one more thing we can do to
simplify this expression,
to understand how to maximize it,
is to substitute the definition of
the marginal likelihood of xi given
the parameters, by using the definition
from a few slides before.
So each data point density is a mixture
of Gaussian densities, right?
Okay, so now we have this optimization problem.
And just one more thing we forgot here, is
that we have some constraints, right?
We have to say that the weights pi are
non-negative, and that they sum up to 1.
Because otherwise, it will not be
an actual probability distribution.
But now it seems like we're good to go.
Now we may use your favorite stochastic
optimization algorithm from TensorFlow,
like Adam or
whatever you would like to use,
and we can optimize this thing to
find the optimal parameters, right?
Well, it turns out that we kind of forgot
one important set of constraints here.
The covariance matrices sigma cannot be arbitrary.
Imagine
that your optimization algorithm propose
to use covariance matrix with all zeros.
It just doesn't work.
It doesn't define a proper Gaussian
distribution.
Because in the Gaussian distribution
definition you have to invert this matrix,
and you have to compute its determinant,
and divide by it.
So if you have a matrix which is all 0s,
you will have lots of problems like
division by 0, and stuff like that.
So it's not a good idea to assume that
the covariance matrix can be anything.
And actually, the set valid covariance
matrices is something called positive semi-definite matrices.
Don't worry if you don't know what it is,
it's not the important right now.
The important part is that it's
a really hard constraint to follow,
so it's hard to adapt your favorite
stochastic gradient descent algorithm to
always follow this constraint.
So to maintain this property that
the matrices are always positive
semi-definite. I don't know how to do it
efficiently, so we have a problem here,
we don't know how to optimize this thing,
at least with stochastic gradient descent.
Well, it turns out that even
if you get this constraint, so
if you consider a simpler model, for
example if you say that all the covariance
matrices are diagonal, which
means that the ellipsoids that correspond
to the Gaussians cannot be rotated.
They have to be aligned with the axes.
In this case it's much easier
to maintain this constraint.
And you can actually use some
stochastic optimization here.
So for example,
in this example I used Adam and
I tuned its learning rate
to optimize this thing.
And you can see that it's
doing a reasonable job here.
So the blue curve is the,
performance of the Adam here.
On the x-axis we see epochs, and
on the y-axis we see log likelihood,
which we are trying to maximize.
And so, Adam is doing a good job, right?
In like 10 epochs it optimized this
thing to something reasonable.
And the green line here is the ground truth
which came from ... because I know
from which probability distribution
I generated this data, so,
I know the optimal value for
the log-likelihood.
But it turns out that even in this case
where we don't have this very complicated
constraints you can do so much better by
exploiting the structure of your problem.
And this is something we're going
to discuss in the rest of the week,
is something called
the expectation maximization (EM) algorithm.
And if you apply it here,
it just works so much better.
In a few iterations
it found the value,
which is better than the Ground Truth,
which probably is overfitting,
but anyway it works good
on the test set as well.
So to summarize,
we may have two reasons to not
to use this stochastic
gradient descent here.
First of all, it may be hard to follow
some constraints which you may care about,
like positive semi-definite
covariance matrices.
And second of all,
expectation maximization algorithm,
which can exploit
the structure of your problem,
sometimes is much faster and more
efficient.
So as a general summary: we discussed that
the Gaussian mixture model is a flexible
probability distribution,
which can solve the clustering problem for
you if you fit your data into
this Gaussian mixture model.
And sometimes it's hard to optimize with stochastic gradient descent, but
there is this alternative which
we'll talk about in the next video.
[MUSIC]